Martin Keller 240813:

Based on the work we did over the last year or so on the Watershed Strategy and it's supporting documents (all accessible through the Watershed Strategy website link), including Watershed Characterization Report, Key Natural Resource Issues, Watershed Monitoring Programs Summery, Climate Change Vulnerability and Risk Assessment, and Watershed Climate Resiliency Plan, we have a solid foundation to build and renew / develop watershed plans for the individual watersheds in Conservation Halton’s (CH) jurisdiction. The long term vision is for all individual watersheds to have a completed watershed plan in the next 5-10 years. We would like to start with the 16 Mile Creek watershed.

The current Watershed Strategy work is high level, and applicable to all of CH’s jurisdiction. Now, we need to translate this to what is relevant and get to a more detailed understanding of how an individual watershed “works” and what is happening in each of them. Broadly speaking, what are the human activities influencing the water cycle and natural processes, including growth and development. We also need to have a more detailed understanding of how climate change is influencing and exacerbating the current impacts.

One of the key gaps is that we do not have a water balance / water budget for 16 Mile Creek (nor for any of the other watersheds in CH’s jurisdiction). Yes, the aim was to build on the existing work you and your team already have done, hence me reaching out. This water budget would be for the watershed, in contrast to the Source Protection Tier 3 water budgets that are drinking water system specific. Whether the Tier 2 water budgets done under source protection would be of value would be a question, they are quite old though. CH certainly has a comprehensive set of monitoring data, most of which should already be on the ORMGP platform.

We are interested in gaining a comprehensive understanding of the water flow system and water resources in 16 Mile Creek, specifically better spatial understanding of water gains and water losses in the watershed, and how these processes are influenced by climate change. Longer term, our interest is also in more predictive modeling to see how climate change (and other variables, e.g., development) could further change these processes. During the 2022 drought, for example, a number of Halton Hills wells ran dry (or more precisely, we heard from Halton Hills well owners via mayor and board members – wells affected by the drought were more wide spread than just Halton Hills). Can we get a better localized understanding of vulnerable aquifers, and how they may be influenced by climate change? This spring, we have been dealing mostly with too much water (e.g., flooding), but the flip side is of equal importance in getting a better understanding.

I hope this provides a bit more context. As mentioned, we are working on the 2025 budget, and some of the items mentioned above (e.g., predictive modeling) may need a longer term horizon to be tackled.